Post TPAC changes to Web Install (#695)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: WebInstall/explainer_cross_domain.md

    "install_sources": [ 
	    {"origin": "streamflix.com"}   
    ]
}
```

![Different domain install flow](./difdomaininstall.png) 

### **Creation of online catalogs**

 The other use case for the API is related to the creation of online catalogs. A web site/app can list and install web apps. For example, `store.com` would be able to distribute apps on multiple platforms and multiple devices.

```javascript
/* tries to install a cross-origin web app */

const installApp = async (manifest_id) => {
    if ('install' in navigator === false) return; // api not supported
    try {
            await navigator.install(manifest_id);
    } catch(err) {
        switch(err.message){
            case 'AbortError':
                /* Operation was aborted*/
                break;
           
        }
    }
};
```

  ![Install flow from an app repository](./apprepositoryinstallation.png) 

## Proposed Solution

### The `navigator.install` method

To install a web app, a web site would use the promise-based method `navigator.install([<manifest_id>[, <params>]]);`. This method will:

* Resolve when an installation was completed.
    * The success value will be an object that contains:

>      	*  `mode`: string with the surface-hint where the app was installed.

Reviewer: Is this still correct?  You're not using `mode` anymore as an additional param...

* Be rejected if the prompt is not shown or if the app installation did not complete. It'll reject with a [`DOMException`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DOMException) value of:

>     * `AbortError`: The installation (prompt) was closed/cancelled.

Reviewer 2: WDYT about a `ManifestIdMismatchError` (or something more concise) to indicate that the install failed because the specified `manifest_id` did not match the id read from the manifest at the `install_url`?

![Promises resolve/reject flow](./installPromises.png) 

#### **Signatures of the `install` method (cross-origin)**
The cross-origin part of the Web Install API consists of the extension to the navigator interface with an `install` method. This method receives:

> * `manifest_id`: decalres the specific application to be installed. If the content to be installed is not content with a manifest, a `install_url` parameter can be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `manifest_id`: declares the specific application to be installed. If the content to be installed does not have a manifest, an `install_url` parameter can be specified via [optional parameters](#parameters).
```

* optional [parameters](#parameters).

> Unless the UA decides to [gate this functionality behind installation](#gating-capability-behind-installation), the behaviour between calling the `install` method on a tab or on an installed application should not differ. The install method can be used in two different ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless the UA decides to [gate this functionality behind installation](#gating-capability-behind-installation), the behaviour between calling the `install` method when on a tab or on an installed application should not differ. The install method can be used in two different ways:
```

1. `navigator.install(<manifest_id>)`: The method receives a parameter which is a [manifest id](https://w3c.github.io/manifest/#id-member) to a web app to install. This will prompt for installation of the app if the requesting origin has installation permissions (see [security section](#integration-with-the-permissions-api)). This is the most common use of the API.

2. `navigator.install(<manifest_id>, <params>)`: This signature of the method includes the optional parameters. These parameters alter how the app is installed and are defined in an object. More information about the parameters is found in the [Parameters](#parameters) subsection of this specification.

#### **Parameters**

The `navigator.install` call can receive an object with a set of parameters that specify different installation behaviours for the app. It is also a way to future-proof the API if additional data were required with the call.

> * **install_url**: Provides a url to install if the specified `manifest_id` can't be found. The UA can attempt to install this origin instead. 

Reviewer: The way that this is written implies that it will still try to install from the location indicated in `manifest_id` _first_.  From discussions, I thought that the existence of `install_url` meant that it would instead go directly to trying to install from `install_url`, and merely confirm that the manifest_id identified in the manifest at that location matched the one provided as the first parameter.

* **referral-info**: this parameter takes the form of an object that can have arbitrary information required by the calling installation domain. This information can later be retrieved inside the installed application via the [Acquisition Info API](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/blob/main/AcquisitionInfo/explainer.md). 

> #### **Installing the web app**

Reviewer: It feels like this list of events is missing the validation that the installing site has the [install permission](#integration-with-the-permissions-api) (separate from `install_sources`).

> To install a same domain web site/app, the process is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install a cross domain web site/app, the process is as follows:
```

1. Origin site that triggers the installation must have installation permissions as it tries to install a cross-origin app.

> 2. target site/app must comply with *[installability criteria](#installability-criteria), if any*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Target site/app must comply with *[installability criteria](#installability-criteria), if any*.
```

> 3. If the target content is a web app with a manifest, check if the domain is in the list of [allowed origins](#install-sources-manifest-field) to install said content. If the target content is not a web app, the UA may offer different UX that informs the user that the target might not integrate with the host OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the target content is a web app with a manifest, check if the installing domain is in the list of [allowed origins](#install-sources-manifest-field) to install said content. If the target content has no manifest, the UA may offer different UX that informs the user that the target might not integrate with the host OS.

```

> 3. If the target content is a web app with a manifest, check if the domain is in the list of [allowed origins](#install-sources-manifest-field) to install said content. If the target content is not a web app, the UA may offer different UX that informs the user that the target might not integrate with the host OS.

Reviewer: Not completely sure what you're trying to say with 3 with regard to unmanifested apps.  Are you saying that the UA may choose to not install them, or are you saying that the lack of a manifest may mean that certain integrations with the OS may not be possible without a manifest?

## Installability criteria
In order for an application/site to be installed, it must comply with *installability criteria*. **This criteria is entirely up to the UA**, can *vary depending on the installation target*, and can be optional.

Modern browsers allow for different degrees of installation of different types of content, ranging from traditional web sites all the way up to Progressive Web Apps. **The core functionality of the API is that it allows to install *anything* initiated with a user action**.

A user agent might decide to have only the requirement of HTTPS to allow installation of a web site, or may need as well a manifest file and/or service worker to install a web app or might not require anything at all, allowing the user to install any content they wish.

## Privacy and Security Considerations

### Same-origin policy

> * The content installed using the `navigator.install` **does not inherit or auto-grant permissions from the installation origin**. This API does not break the *same-origin security model of the web. Every different domain has its own set of independent permissions bound to their specific origin.

Reviewer: Missing closing asterisk somewhere:

```
does not break the *same-origin security model
```

### Preventing installation prompt spamming from third parties

> * This API can only be invoked in a top-level navigable and be invoked from a [secure context](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-secure-contexts/).

Reviewer: Is this the correct phrasing? 

> top-level navigable

The installation permission for an origin should be time-limited and expire after a period of time defined by the UA. After the permission expires the UA will prompt again for permission from the user.

####  **Integration with the Permissions API**
A new permission that can be associated with an origin means a new integration with the [Permissions API](https://www.w3.org/TR/permissions/). The install API will make available the "installation" [PermissionDescriptor](https://www.w3.org/TR/permissions/#dom-permissiondescriptor) as a new [*powerful feature*](https://www.w3.org/TR/permissions/#dfn-specifies-a-powerful-feature). This would make it possible to know programmatically if `install` would be blocked.

```javascript
/* example of querying for the state of an installation permission using the Permission API  */

const { state } = await navigator.permissions.query({
  name: "installation"
});
switch (state) {
  case "granted":
    navigator.install('https://elk.zone');
    break;
  case "prompt":
    //shows the install button in the web UI

>     showInstallButton();

Reviewer: Similar feedback/concern with this example as I expressed in the example at line 58.

    break;
  case "denied":
    redirectToAppStore();
    break;
}
```
####  **Install Sources manifest field**
* A new field called `install_sources` will be added to the manifest file to have a control list of sites that can install the app. In its most restrictive case, the developer can specify to not allow installation from any other origin, in which case the PWA conforms to its usual behaviour of only being able to be installed from its same origin.

>     * **`getInstalledApps()` method: If supported by the UA, the `getInstalledApps` method returns a list of the content that has been installed from that installation origin.** This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until cache is cleared. The installation origin *will not* be informed of any apps installed by other means, whether via another installation origin, directly through the browser, or by a native app store. The method returns a list of manifest ids of content installed from the calling origin. Additionally, if the browser has an active 'Do Not Track (DNT)', equivalent 'Global Privacy Control (GPC)' setting, is in Private browsing mode, or is an opinionated browser towards privacy, this is ignored and installation origins will not be allowed to know if that application is installed.

Reviewer: Is this on `navigator`?  Is it `async`? In scenarios where it has installed nothing or DNT/GPC/etc... is in play, does this return back `null` or an empty list?

>     * **`getInstalledApps()` method: If supported by the UA, the `getInstalledApps` method returns a list of the content that has been installed from that installation origin.** This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until cache is cleared. The installation origin *will not* be informed of any apps installed by other means, whether via another installation origin, directly through the browser, or by a native app store. The method returns a list of manifest ids of content installed from the calling origin. Additionally, if the browser has an active 'Do Not Track (DNT)', equivalent 'Global Privacy Control (GPC)' setting, is in Private browsing mode, or is an opinionated browser towards privacy, this is ignored and installation origins will not be allowed to know if that application is installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * **`getInstalledApps()` method: If supported by the UA, the `getInstalledApps` method returns a list of the content that has been installed from that installation origin.** This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until the installation origin's cache is cleared. The installation origin *will not* be informed of any apps installed by other means, whether via another installation origin, directly through the browser, or by a native app store. The method returns a list of manifest ids of content installed from the calling origin. Additionally, if the browser has an active 'Do Not Track (DNT)', equivalent 'Global Privacy Control (GPC)' setting, is in Private browsing mode, or is an opinionated browser towards privacy, this is ignored and installation origins will not be allowed to know if that application is installed.
```

>     * **`getInstalledApps()` method: If supported by the UA, the `getInstalledApps` method returns a list of the content that has been installed from that installation origin.** This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until cache is cleared. The installation origin *will not* be informed of any apps installed by other means, whether via another installation origin, directly through the browser, or by a native app store. The method returns a list of manifest ids of content installed from the calling origin. Additionally, if the browser has an active 'Do Not Track (DNT)', equivalent 'Global Privacy Control (GPC)' setting, is in Private browsing mode, or is an opinionated browser towards privacy, this is ignored and installation origins will not be allowed to know if that application is installed.

Reviewer: This bulletpoint seems out-of-place here and should be elsewhere, no?

```json
{
    "name": "Awesome PWA",
    "display": "standalone",
    "start_url": "/index.html",
    "install_sources": [ 
	    {"origin": "apps.microsoft.com"},
	    {"origin": "store.app"}
    ]
}
```

This new manifest field will protect the app from being listed in undesirable repositories and give the developer absolute control about where do they want the PWA to be installed from. At best, the developer can allow the PWA to be installed from any site ("`*`"), at its most restrictive, it can only allow installing from the app's same scope. This field is only for the JS API and does not interfere with existing ways of installing PWAs through mechanisms like enterprise policies.

If no `install_sources` are present in the manifest file, the default should be to not allow an app to be installed from cross-origin sites.

#### **Gating capability behind installation**

> A UA may choose to gate the `navigator.install` capability behind installation of the web content. This would serve as an additional trust signal from the user towards enabling the functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A UA may choose to gate the `navigator.install` capability behind a requirement that the installation origin itself is installed. This would serve as an additional trust signal from the user towards enabling the functionality.
```

## Alternative Solutions

* **HTML anchor tag target install
`<a href="https://airhorner.com" target="_install">honk</a>`:** An alternate solution to allow installation of web apps is by allowing a new target type of `_install` to the HTML anchor tag. This has the benefit of being able to work in environments that have JS disabled and can also be another entry point for installation. While this is an elegant solution, it limits the amount of information a developer can act upon that the promise does provide, such as if the prompt was shown or if the origin has permissions to install apps.

## Open Questions

* Should we enable a [try-before-you-buy](https://github.com/PEConn/web-install-explainer/blob/main/explainer.md#try-before-you-buy) flow scenario for web install?

> * Should we provide feedback to the directory?

Reviewer: Is this still an open question?  Haven't you addressed this already by both allowing the installation origin to be aware of the success, as well as the ability to call `getInstalledApps()`?

> * Do we need to attribute the source of the installation?

Reviewer: Same question...is this still an open question?

On a successful promise resolution, the origin is returned so the originating web app can decide to use that information as it pleases.

* Should we allow an [`AbortController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortController) to enable cancelling the installation if the process takes too long?

* Can we remove power from the developer to query if the app is installed by offloading to the UA the knowledge of which apps are installed?
    * Is there any form of attribute that can be added to a DOM element to signal this distinction/difference?

## Glossary
* **installation origin**: the origin that initiates the call to the `install` method.

> * **installed origin**: the origin that is installed with the `install` method.

Reviewer: You haven't used this term a single time in the explainer.

* List purchased/installed goods from a store ([see Digital Goods API](https://github.com/WICG/digital-goods/blob/main/explainer.md)).
* Installing content that does not pass the installability criteria (see *[installability criteria](#installability-criteria)*).

## Use Cases

There are two main use cases that the Web Install API enables for cross-domain origins:

### **Web app installation from associated domain**

An (out-of-scope) domain associated to a web app could prompt for the installation of said web app. The typical use case for this is a marketing website that can offer their customers a direct way to install the associated web app.

As an example, a user can navigate to the `streamflix.com` website and find UX that allows them to install the associated application found in `streamflix.app`.

```javascript
/* Example that uses the Permissions API to check if the installation permission is set before calling the install method */
  const installApp = async () => {
    try{
        const { state } = await navigator.permissions.query({
            name: "installation"
          });
          switch (state) {
            case "granted":

>                 const value = await navigator.install('https://streamflix.app');

Reviewer 3: ```
const value = await navigator.install('https://streamflix.app', { install_url: 'https://streamflix.app' });
```

              break;
            case "prompt":
              showInstallButton();
              break;
            case "denied":
              browseToAppStorePage();
              break;
          }
    }
    catch(err){console.error(err.message)}
  };
```

Manifest file for the `streamflix.app`, allowing installation *ONLY* from `streamflix.com` :

```json
{
    "name": "Streamflix App",
    "display": "standalone",
    "start_url": "/index.html",
    "install_sources": [ 
	    {"origin": "streamflix.com"}   
    ]
}
```

![Different domain install flow](./difdomaininstall.png) 

### **Creation of online catalogs**

 The other use case for the API is related to the creation of online catalogs. A web site/app can list and install web apps. For example, `store.com` would be able to distribute apps on multiple platforms and multiple devices.

```javascript
/* tries to install a cross-domain web app */

const installApp = async (manifest_id) => {
    try {

>         const value = await navigator.install(manifest_id);

Reviewer 3: The manifest id doesn't necessarily resolve into a serve-able URL. So it cannot be the only thing populated here.

Can you please require the id and a source to get the app, perhaps `navigator.install(manifest_id, {url: install_url});`

Author: I was picturing the argument to be either a manifest_id or a url (for installing content that might not be a web app). but that does promote ambiguity around the id/start_url/url and is not in our best interest. I do like however the idea of including the url as an optional param. 

How do you see this working for installations of content that are not apps? 

`navigator.install('https://streamflix.app', {url:'https://streamflix.app'})`;

`navigator.install('', {url:''https://streamflix.app})`;

`navigator.install({url:'https://streamflix.app'})`; <- guessing this would be the adopted way for non manifest_id content? It might be weird as the omission of the first param is how the same-domain install works.

* Resolve when an installation was completed.
    * The success value will be an object that contains:
     	*  `mode`: string with the surface-hint where the app was installed.
* Be rejected if the prompt is not shown or if the app installation did not complete. It'll reject with a [`DOMException`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DOMException) value of:
    * `NotAllowedError`: The (new) `installation` [Permissions Policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Permissions_Policy) has blocked the use of this feature.
    * `NotSupportedError`: the target does not comply with the [installability criteria](#installability-criteria).
    * `InsufficientEngagementError`: the UA's required (if any) [engagement heuristics](https://web.dev/install-criteria/#criteria) have not been met.
    * `AbortError`: The installation (prompt) was closed/cancelled.
    * `TimeoutError`: The installation failed due to timeout.
    * `OperationError`: other error.
	

 ```javascript
/* simple example of using navigator.install */

const installApp = async () => {
    try{

>         const value = await navigator.install('https://streamflix.app');

Reviewer 3: `const value = await navigator.install('https://streamflix.app/main_app_identity', { url: "https://streamflix.app/"});`

    }
    catch(err){console.error(err.message)}
};
```

```javascript
/* Example of advanced error handling */

(...)
.catch(error => {
    if(error.name === 'NotSupportedError') {
        // target site is not installable
        console.log("Target is not an installable content.");
    }
    else if (error.name === 'NotAllowedError') {
        // origin cannot install other webapps.
        console.log("Origin does not have permissions to install web apps.");
    }
    else {
        console.log(error.message);
    }
});
```

![Promises resolve/reject flow](./installPromises.png) 

> 

Reviewer 3: Add a section describing the arguments / IDL / 
```
### Installation arguments `<manifest_id>, { install_url: <url> }`

(Short summary):
- The manifest id declares the specific app that should be installed - e.g install Netflix
- The options provide a way to specify where to find netflix - specifically the `install_url`
  - This is done to allow expanding these options for source later to things like packages, etc.
  - The install_url behavior can be spec'd - load the page, load the manifest, install if ids match - ensure ids match. e.g. You asked me to install Netflix, but I didn't find that here.
    - This also allows the user agent to wait until the appropriate manifest is added to the page.
    - The developer can create a special lightweight install_url different than their normal page, see `https://calendar.google.com/calendar/installwebapp`, which registers service workers and links to a manifest, and nothing else.
- The manifest_id is not always serve-able - the default makes it seem so (as it defaults to the start_url), but there is nothing requiring that - it is used for identification purposes only, and sites exist on the web that now customize this to be the manifest url (for old mobile update compatibility), or just a simple string.
 

```

####  **Install Sources manifest field**
* A new field called `install_sources` will be added to the manifest file to have a control list of sites that can install the app. In its most restrictive case, the developer can specify to not allow installation from any other origin, in which case the PWA conforms to its usual behaviour of only being able to be installed from its same origin.

>     * **`getInstalledApps()` method: If supported by the UA, the `getInstalledApps` method returns a list of the content that has been installed from that installation origin.** This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until cache is cleared. The method returns a list of manifest ids of content installed from the calling origin. Additionally, if the browser has an active 'Do Not Track (DNT)', equivalent 'Global Privacy Control (GPC)' setting, is in Private browsing mode, or is an opinionated browser towards privacy, this is ignored and installation origins will not be allowed to know if that application is installed.

Reviewer 2: Consider leaning a bit more into the fact that it's _only_ the apps installed by this origin so that the limitations are *really* clear. 

"This means the installation origin will be able to know which applications it has installed, until cache is cleared. **The installation origin will not be informed of any apps installed by other means, whether via another installation origin, directly through the browser, or by a native app store.**"

Author: Added the text specifying that it can ONLY get apps installed from that origin. This makes it clearer and avoids possible misinterpretations around what the method is returning.
